WIP: OCPNODE-2462 - Split Filesystem OCP Enhancement (#1657)
openshift/enhancements: enhancements/kubelet/split-filesystem.md

  - TBD
approvers: # A single approver is preferred, the role of the approver is to raise important questions, help ensure the enhancement receives reviews from all applicable areas/SMEs, and determine when consensus is achieved such that the EP can move forward to implementation.  Having multiple approvers makes it difficult to determine who is responsible for the actual approval.
  - TBD
api-approvers: # In case of new or modified APIs or API extensions (CRDs, aggregated apiservers, webhooks, finalizers). If there is no API change, use "None"
  - TBD
creation-date: 2024-07-30
last-updated: 2024-07-30
tracking-link: # link to the tracking ticket (for example: Jira Feature or Epic ticket) that corresponds to this enhancement
  - https://issues.redhat.com/browse/OCPNODE-2461
see-also:
  - "https://github.com/kubernetes/enhancements/tree/master/keps/sig-node/4191-split-image-filesystem/README.md"
---

# Split Filesystem

## Open Questions

- Installer does not support creating openshift clusters with multiple disk.

>   Does this feature have value without users being able to configure their cluster to have a separate filesystem?

Author: done.

- Do we need a drop in configuration for container storage?

>   - https://github.com/containers/storage/pull/1885

Author: I have this open for a discussion as I'm not sure if we want this functionality or not at the moment. It sounded like for dev preview we would maybe want a drop in config because having a customer overwrite the entire storage conf is way more error prone than changing a single field.

But for tech preview, we maybe don't need to go this route. I'll leave this as is so we can continue to discuss pros/cons.

>   - https://github.com/containers/storage/pull/1885

Author: I think we decided to not go this route as opening up configuration for storage puts us on the hook to support a lot of edge cases.

- How does one delete all images and containers once the container runtime config is changed?
  - crictl on all images and containers on each node?

> - What is the best form of telemetry to show that a customer is using this feature?

Author: updated.

> - How would this feature work with layering?

Author: Sounds good.

> - Day 2 operations for adding disks to openshift

Author: Added this to design for dev preview.

### Definitions

### User Stories

As an Openshift admin, I want to store images in a separate filesystem from ephemeral storage and the writeable layer.
The images can be on a read-only filesystem while ephemeral storage and the writeable layers can live on a writeable filesystem.

### Goals

- Enable ability to split filesystem in openshift
- Automate the setup of this feature to avoid user errors

### Non-Goals

- We will not support a separate disk for the entire container runtime filesystem due
to a lack of interest from customer requests.

- Customers will not have the ability to change the location of the image cache.

### Sketch of what happens when this feature is enabled

- A user specifies in the container runtime config that they want to split the filesystem (use this feature)
  - Feature gate is set for kubelet
  - container storage uses image store (hard coded to /var/lib/images)
  - /var/lib/images is relabeled to match the same selinux labels as /var/lib/container/storage.

### Manual Enablement of Feature

In the developer preview, a user can run the following steps to enable this feature.

We will automate these steps for tech preview.

#### Feature gate

> User needs to set `KubeletSeparateDiskGC` feature gate in the kubelet config.

Author: Thanks for clearing this up offline.

```storage.bu
variant: openshift
version: 4.14.0
metadata:
  name: 40-storage-override
  labels:
    machineconfiguration.openshift.io/role: worker
storage:
  files:
  - path: /etc/containers/storage.conf
    mode: 0644
    overwrite: true
    contents:
      inline: |
        [storage]
        
        # Default Storage Driver
        driver = "overlay"
        
        runroot = "/var/containers/storage"
        graphroot = "/var/lib/containers/storage"
        imageroot = "/var/lib/images"
```

And then run `butane storage.bu -o storage.yaml

Applying storage.yaml will apply this machine config to your workers.

#### Labeling Filesystem

One could use the following systemd file to relabel the imagestore location.

```
        [Unit]
        Description=Label ImageStore
        After=crio-install.service

        [Service]
        Type=oneshot
        ExecStart=rpm-ostree install \
          -y \
          --apply-live \
          --allow-inactive \
          policycoreutils-python-utils
        ExecStart=semanage fcontext -a -e /var/lib/containers/storage /var/lib/images
        ExecStart=restorecon -R -v /var/lib/images

        [Install]
        WantedBy=multi-user.target

> ```

Author: updated.

#### Remove all old images

> Since the image cache has changed locations, all the old images left over should be removed.

Author: Why would disconnected installers be impacted here?

> Since the image cache has changed locations, all the old images left over should be removed.

Reviewer: we wouldn't be able to GC old images if crio doesn't keep track of the images at the old location

> Since the image cache has changed locations, all the old images left over should be removed.

Author: I asked podman about what they do is this scenario. Generally once these configurations change, the containers/images are not cleaned up with any podman functions.

I think day 1 support for this would be necessary. Maybe we could state that if one enables this feature, deleting the graphroot/imagestore is the recommended procedure. I don't know if that means we need to do this with MCO.

> Since the image cache has changed locations, all the old images left over should be removed.

Reviewer: the more I think about this problem the more i think we should hardcode imagestore to `/var/lib/images` permanently and handle the update once for everyone then not have to deal with it again

```
imagestore="" The image storage path (the default is assumed to be the same as graphroot). Path of the imagestore, which is different from graphroot. By default, images in the storage library are stored in the graphroot. If imagestore is provided, newly pulled images will be stored in the imagestore location. All other storage continues to be stored in the graphroot. When using the overlay driver, images previously stored in the graphroot remain accessible. Internally, the storage library mounts graphroot as an additionalImageStore to allow this behavior.
```

Container storage is configured in openshift by adding this [file](https://github.com/openshift/machine-config-operator/blob/master/templates/common/_base/files/container-storage.yaml) to /etc/containers/storage.conf.

Container Runtime Config allows one to change the overlay size of storage. Other fields of this file are kept the same as the template.

### Feature Gate

We will add a feature gate to openshift/api.

```golang
	FeatureGateKubeletSeparateDiskGC = newFeatureGate("KubeletSeparateDiskGC").
						reportProblemsToJiraComponent("node").
						contactPerson("kannon92").
						productScope(kubernetes).

> 						enableIn(configv1.DevPreviewNoUpgrade).

Author: I thought that we would need a feature gate in openshift/api.

> 						enableIn(configv1.DevPreviewNoUpgrade).

Reviewer 2: When we go tech preview we will.

						mustRegister()
```

### Configuration of container storage

> ### API Changes

Reviewer 2: I think we should state here there are not any API changes for Dev Preview.

```golang
type ContainerRuntimeConfiguration struct {
  ...
	// +optional
	SplitFilesystem bool `json:"splitFilesystem,omitempty"`

}
```

API is defined [here](https://github.com/openshift/api/blob/0d46442e8df17a87cfcf6666ab19b28e88620b59/machineconfiguration/v1/types.go#L812).

This feature will write the updated container storage file.

This will also trigger labeling of /var/lib/images.

### Risks and Mitigations

Kubernetes and Openshift do not really advertise the support of separate filesystems.
We also do not allow for most configuration of the container runtime. Changing configuration

> in this area can break your system.

Reviewer 2: We can probably remove this comment, since we want to eventually create a supported solution.

To derisk this scenario, in tech preview, we will propose an API to configure imagestore.

### Drawbacks

## Test Plan

TBD

## Graduation Criteria

### Dev Preview

> - Ability to view if a user has configured this feature.

Reviewer 2: This would require an API change. We should move this section to TechPreview.

- Feature gates to enable this feature
- API change to streamline configuration of this feature.

### Dev Preview -> Tech Preview

> Will update once we are ready to promote.

Reviewer 2: API Changes go here.

I also suggest other requirements:

* Installer Support
* Day-2 support for additional filesystems

This is where we call out external dependencies to make the feature better from a user's viewpoint.

Upstream Kubernetes focused on allowing Kubelet garbage collection and eviction to work if the filesystem is split.

This enhancement focuses on enablement in Openshift.

## Motivation

See [KEP Motivation](https://github.com/kubernetes/enhancements/tree/master/keps/sig-node/4191-split-image-filesystem/README.md#motivation)

### Definitions

### User Stories

#### Story 1

As an Openshift admin, I want to store images in a separate filesystem from ephemeral storage and the writeable layer.
The images can be on a read-only filesystem while ephemeral storage and the writeable layers can live on a writeable filesystem.

#### Story 2

As an Openshift admin, I want to store images on a dedicated disk that multiple nodes can share.

### Goals

- Enable ability to split filesystem in openshift
- Automate the setup of this feature to avoid user errors

### Non-Goals

- We will not support a separate disk for the entire container runtime filesystem due
to a lack of interest from customer requests.

- Customers will not have the ability to change the location of the image cache.

> ### Sketch of what happens when this feature is enabled

Reviewer: these pieces all read to me as something that should go in the Proposal

```
### Sketch of what happens when this feature is enabled
### Manual Enablement of Feature
#### Feature gate
#### Storage Configuration
#### Prequisites for Filesystem
#### Script
#### Remove all old images
#### Checking if feature is enabled on a node
```

Author: updated. Good call.

- A user specifies in the container runtime config that they want to split the filesystem (use this feature)
  - Feature gate is set for kubelet
  - container storage uses image store (hard coded to /var/lib/images)
  - /var/lib/images is relabeled to match the same selinux labels as /var/lib/container/storage.

### Manual Enablement of Feature

In the developer preview, a user can run the following steps to enable this feature.

We will further refine the user APIs and interfaces for tech preview.

#### Feature gate

User can set the `KubeletSeparateDiskGC` feature gate in `CustomNoUpgrade.

```yaml
apiVersion: config.openshift.io/v1
kind: FeatureGate
metadata:
  name: cluster
spec:
  featureSet: "CustomNoUpgrade"
  customNoUpgrade:
    enabled:
      - KubeletSeparateDiskGC
```

#### Storage Configuration

One could use a butane config as follows:

```storage.bu
variant: openshift

> version: 4.14.0

Reviewer: does this work with `4.17.0`? if so we should use the newest version IMO

Author: Interestingly enough I only got this to work with 4.14.

metadata:
  name: 40-storage-override
  labels:
    machineconfiguration.openshift.io/role: worker
storage:
  files:
  - path: /etc/containers/storage.conf
    mode: 0644
    overwrite: true
    contents:
      inline: |
        [storage]
        
        # Default Storage Driver
        driver = "overlay"
        
        runroot = "/var/containers/storage"
        graphroot = "/var/lib/containers/storage"
        imageroot = "/var/lib/images"
```

And then run `butane storage.bu -o storage.yaml

Applying storage.yaml will apply this machine config to your workers.

#### Prequisites for Filesystem

User must have a disk partition labeled as IMAGE_STORE.

#### Script

> We will have a script called `split-filesystem.sh`.

Reviewer: will this be on an openshift node or will we just provide it?

Author: Below I have an example that I would model. It would be inlined in a file. Something like https://github.com/openshift/machine-config-operator/blob/master/templates/common/_base/files/kubelet-auto-sizing.yaml.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
MCO will write a template script called `split-filesystem.sh` to the filesystem.
```

This bash script will mount the filesystem using `IMAGE_STORE` label.
The script will check if the selinux labels are correct for `/var/lib/images`.
If the labels are correct, we will create a file called `.relabel_complete`.
If the labels are incorrect, folder will be relabled.

This script will be injected as a systemd file and referenced in a unit file similarly to how we do this for the kubelet auto sizing feature.

> One can look at [kubelet-auto-sizing scruot](https://github.com/openshift/machine-config-operator/blob/master/templates/common/_base/files/kubelet-auto-sizing.yaml) for an example of the script and [kubelet-auto-sizing unit](https://github.com/openshift/machine-config-operator/blob/master/templates/common/_base/units/kubelet-auto-node-size.service.yaml) for an example of the unit file.

Reviewer: nit: s/scruot/script

Author: udated.

We will run this script after the `crio.service`.

#### Remove all old images

Since the image cache has changed locations, all the old images left over should be removed.

> Simplest option is to remove the images on each node that this feature was enabled.

Reviewer: should spell out what to do with the containers (which would be left over after the reboot), especially because a lot of those containers will require a running network pod to remove

Author: I have this sorta as an open question.

Do we manually delete all of /var/lib/container/storage on enablement of this feature or disable?

I think using a tool like `crictl` may actually not work if we change the container runtime. For podman changing these locations does orphan those containers/images.

I think a manual rm may be the best thing we can do.. Unless we delete before enablement of the feature.

Reviewer 2: Why do we want the old images removed?

## Proposal

### Background

The main way to enable a split filesystem case is add `imageStore` in the container storage configuration.

See [container storage](https://github.com/containers/storage/blob/main/docs/containers-storage.conf.5.md).

```
imagestore="" The image storage path (the default is assumed to be the same as graphroot). Path of the imagestore, which is different from graphroot. By default, images in the storage library are stored in the graphroot. If imagestore is provided, newly pulled images will be stored in the imagestore location. All other storage continues to be stored in the graphroot. When using the overlay driver, images previously stored in the graphroot remain accessible. Internally, the storage library mounts graphroot as an additionalImageStore to allow this behavior.
```

Container storage is configured in openshift by adding this [file](https://github.com/openshift/machine-config-operator/blob/master/templates/common/_base/files/container-storage.yaml) to /etc/containers/storage.conf.

Container Runtime Config allows one to change the overlay size of storage. Other fields of this file are kept the same as the template.

> 

Reviewer: I would recommend we structure the proposal like:
```
### Dev Preview
### Tech Preview
### GA
```
and have the required manual steps described in Dev Preview section, then describe what we're doing concretely in TP/GA

Author: Updated.

User can set the `KubeletSeparateDiskGC` feature gate in `CustomNoUpgrade.

```yaml
apiVersion: config.openshift.io/v1
kind: FeatureGate
metadata:
  name: cluster
spec:
  featureSet: "CustomNoUpgrade"
  customNoUpgrade:
    enabled:
      - KubeletSeparateDiskGC
```

#### Storage Configuration

One could use a butane config as follows:

```storage.bu
variant: openshift
version: 4.17.0
metadata:
  name: 40-storage-override
  labels:
    machineconfiguration.openshift.io/role: worker
storage:
  files:
  - path: /etc/containers/storage.conf
    mode: 0644
    overwrite: true
    contents:
      inline: |
        [storage]
        
        # Default Storage Driver
        driver = "overlay"
        
        runroot = "/var/containers/storage"
        graphroot = "/var/lib/containers/storage"
        imageroot = "/var/lib/images"
```

And then run `butane storage.bu -o storage.yaml

Applying storage.yaml will apply this machine config to your workers.

#### Prequisites for Filesystem

User must have a disk partition labeled as IMAGE_STORE.

#### Script

We will have a script called `split-filesystem.sh`.

This bash script will mount the filesystem using `IMAGE_STORE` label.

> The script will check if the selinux labels are correct for `/var/lib/images`.

Reviewer 2: First boot, the script should mount and relabel the filesystem. Walking the file tree would be too slow to validate correct labels.

Then the next step would be to write .relabel_complete.

I'm unclear on why we have to validate the labels.

#### Remove all old images

Since the image cache has changed locations, all the old images left over should be removed.

Simplest option is to remove the images on each node that this feature was enabled.

#### Checking if feature is enabled on a node

One can use `crictl imagefsinfo` to see if the filesystem is split. This will show imageFilesystems and containerFilesystems.

If they are split you would need a different mount in containerFilesystems.

#### Feature Gate

Since we are enabling only for Dev Preview, everything will be configured via MachineConfigs or other OpenShift APIs already created.

In tech preview, we will add feature gates in openshift/api.

### Tech Preview

Details will be filled out more for tech preview once dev preview has been released.

#### API Changes

These API changes will be done in the tech preview stage.

```golang
type ContainerRuntimeConfiguration struct {
  ...
	// +optional
	SplitFilesystem bool `json:"splitFilesystem,omitempty"`

}
```

API is defined [here](https://github.com/openshift/api/blob/0d46442e8df17a87cfcf6666ab19b28e88620b59/machineconfiguration/v1/types.go#L812).

This feature will write the updated container storage file.

> This will also trigger labeling of /var/lib/images.

Reviewer 2: split-filesystem.sh can probably take care of the relabelling.
